All right, now, let's jump in to doing some basic math with Java.
So what we can do, first of all, is let's create another class just to have a clean slate.
And so I'm going to create a new class under the source folder.
And with did I call the other one?
No stuff, I don't know.
Call this one man -- stuff.
All right.
And again, we'll do a public static void.
Main.
All right.
So the first thing we can do is just print out the results of some really simple math.
Let's let's try that first.
So we'll do a system that out with a duty.
And probably the simplest thing we could do is just add two numbers together.
So let's add three plus five, just like that.
And let's run this cool.
All right.
Really straightforward.
Now we can keep stringing more things together here, like so.
And the compiler will figure out what to do with all of that.
There we go.
OK, so there you go.
All right.
We're done with Java math.
No, I'm kidding.
All right.
So that's addition we can do subtraction, of course, 10 minus seven.
Now, of course, these are all in terms of algebra.
These are all integers that we're working with right now, but we can work with the other data types
as well, and we'll see that in a moment.
I mentioned these are all integers, though, because we can also work with negative numbers so we could
do seven minus 10, for example.
Here we go negative three.
OK, so that's not a problem for Java, and we can mix and match as well.
All right.
So let's run that.
Negative nine we get.
Now you may be wondering what's the order in which it's grouping things together for subtraction and
addition?
It goes in order from left to right.
So this would have been seven minus 10, which would yield might which would yield negative three plus
three, which is zero and then zero minus nine, would yield negative nine.
So that's how it got that.
OK.
Four.
For addition and subtraction, it just goes left to right, and addition and subtraction are both of
equal precedence, if you will.
OK.
Let's look at multiplication.
So let's do seven times.
Four.
So we use the asterisk for multiplication.
And I'm sorry, I failed to mention.
I mean, obviously we were using plus and minus, right?
That was pretty straightforward.
Multiplication might be a little less obvious, though, if you're brand new to any kind of programming
at all.
So for multiplication, we use the asterisk symbol.
So this is seven times four.
So if we run this, we get the predictable 28.
And just as in real life with multiplication, the order of these two numbers doesn't matter seven times
four or four times seven going to going to give you the same thing.
OK, and so of course, we can do division as well.
We'll start off with something easy, like eight divided by four.
Let's run this.
OK, so obviously that's two, by the way, so the division symbol is a forward slash, which is this
this thing right here?
Forward slash?
Not to be confused by a backslash.
OK.
So not that one.
This one.
All right, let's see.
And although it's a little bit weirder to see, we could string a few of these together, I suppose.
Something like that.
We'll run that, OK, so still just to add the order of precedence for this.
Well, here I'm not mixing other operations, right?
So it's just going to go from left to right.
So 64 divided by eight is eight, then eight divided by Force two.
All right.
And then you can also mix the operations so we could do eight groups eight times eight divided by blah
blah blah, right?
Let's run that.
Still, to because multiplication and division are on the same level of precedence or order, so in
this particular case, you're still just going left to right.
So eight times eight is 64, divided by eight is eight, divided by four is two.
OK, let's see what happens if we do some division problems that don't yield whole numbers.
So let's do something like seven divided by four, by the way.
As usual, these spaces here are not required.
I just put them there for readability.
I think it looks a little easier to read with a little bit of space there.
All right.
So we'll do seven divided by four.
And we're going to obviously, you know, putting this directly in the system that out that print line.
So let's run that and see what we get.
OK, so that's kind of interesting, and probably not what you might have expected.
We just got a one.
Why did we get a one?
Well, the reason we got a one is because by default, these numbers that we're specifying here, if
they don't have a decimal point in them as these do not, then java's default number type will be integer.
OK, well, and in this particular case, since both numbers are integers, the result will be an integer
as well.
OK.
So four does not go into seven evenly, obviously, right?
In fact, four cannot even go into seven two times.
It can only go into seven one time and then you'll have some remainder or some fractional part.
But integers cannot handle fractions, right?
You can't do decimal points or anything like that with an integer.
Both algebraically and in Java.
And so what ends up happening is that that fractional part just just gets thrown off.
And so you're left with just the whole number part, which is just a one, right?
And so that's why we're getting a one here.
Now, if we wanted to get a more correct answer, we would have to tell Jarvis somehow to give us more
than an integer.
And there are multiple ways to do this.
So first off, the simplest way perhaps to do this is to tell Java that we want the answer back in something
other than an integer.
So first off, we must consider what is another numerical type that is capable of giving us fractional
or decimal answers, right?
So if we go back over to the spreadsheet and zoom back out a little bit, we'll look over here again
and we learned about float and double, right?
And I said that by default in Java, if you don't specify but you use a decimal point, then the default
numerical type will be double.
So if you don't use a decimal point, the default type will be integer.
If you do use decimals, though, then the default type will be double.
So let's see what we can do to get a more meaningful answer out out of the seven divided by four.
So there are actually a few ways we could do this.
One thing we can do is what's called casting where we tell Java.
Yeah, I know that I entered two integers here, but pretend like they're some other type, like a float
or a double.
Maybe one of the simplest ways is to pick one of these numbers, and it probably makes a little more
sense in a division problem to pick the larger number, perhaps and put an f behind it to tell Java
that that's a floating point number and not an integer.
OK.
So let's see what happens when we do this.
I'll run this again.
Yeah, look at that now we get one point seventy five.
OK.
So the basic rule of thumb in Java, when determining how it will handle calculations of this sort is
to know that Java will look at the level of precision of, in this case, these two numbers and whichever
number has the higher level of precision that will determine what the data type will be for the result.
So in other words, here we have these two numbers.
One is a float, one is an integer float is capable of having a higher level of precision.
Or rather, it is capable of expressing more in terms of fractional units or decimal places than an
integer.
And so the result will be a float by default.
Now I could also have put this f here more run that we should get the same thing.
Yeah.
So we get the same thing here because again, the rule is that Java's going to look at the different
types and it's going to see, Oh, well, one of them is a float, and that's more precise for what
we're doing, at least then.
And so therefore the result needs to be a float.
So that's one way we could force this.
Another way is by doing something called casting, where we tell Java to treat one of these integers
as as if it were something with higher precision.
And the way we do that is with parentheses so we can put parentheses here and then say something like
double and then close parentheses.
OK, so now we're we're telling Java, even though this seven is actually an integer kind of like internally,
I want you to convert it to being a double.
And then the previous rule will kick in after that, which is that OK, this will now be treated as
though it were a double, which means that the response will also be a double.
So let's run that.
There we go again.
And of course, I also could have made this a float.
Just the same right, except less precision than a double.
And.
I could have cast the four to a float or a double.
Just the same.
OK.
Or double?
OK, now some of the smarty pants out there might be wondering what would happen if we grouped the whole
entire math problem seven divided by four into parentheses like this.
And then we tried to cast the whole entire thing, right?
So we did something like double, for example, right?
Let's see what what this yields.
Oh, isn't that interesting now we get a one point zero.
Now why is that?
Well, the reason we get a one point zero is because what's happening here is that first, the integer
math is happening inside of these parentheses seven divided by four.
These are still just integers inside of these parentheses here.
Well, I'll highlight exactly what I'm referring to, right?
So the seven divided by four, the seven is an integer, the four is an integer.
And therefore the result of this is going to be an integer, which is going to be one.
And only after this evaluates to a one will then be cast to a double, so one will be cast to a double,
which would just be still.
One is just going to be 1.0.
And that's what we get down here.
A 1.0, so nice try.
If anybody was thinking that, that would be a way that you could get the same level of precision.
But no, it does not work like that.
OK, now let's introduce some variables to do the same things.
So here will I'll undo this and I'm going to extract out a couple of variables.
I suppose I'm going to do a command option fee to extract the variable, and I'll just call this number
one and then I'll do the same thing for the four.
Command option, the or control all TV.
And I will call this one, too.
Now notice by default, the IED extracts these out as integers because that is the default data type
if there is no decimal here.
In fact, let me undo one of these.
And let's see what happens if we make this a 4.0 and then we extract a variable from that.
OK, so then it defaults to double, just as I said earlier, OK?
So I just wanted to show that.
All right.
So anyway.
Numb to.
All right.
So now we can do the same things that we did before, except a little more straightforwardly now, we
could just change these to different types like I could make that a double.
I could make this a float, right, just like that.
And now between a double and a float, if we were to do this, what would be the data type of the result
if we did double divided by float?
I'll give you a second to think about it.
OK, so let's go back over to the spreadsheet and see which one offers the higher level of precision.
So here's float, which is, you know, zoom out a little bit 32 bit.
Right?
And then double is double that, so 64 bit.
So double is higher precision than float, and therefore the result of a double divided by a float would
result in a double.
OK.
All right.
So now let's look at a little bit more advanced concepts with doing math in Java, where we look at
the order of operations.
And that just means like if you have a math problem in Java or an equation or something that mixes different
kinds of operations and operation means addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, et cetera,
et cetera.
In what order will they all be done?
Because they won't always just go from left to right?
Some operations take precedence over other operations.
So let me show you what I mean here.
I guess I'm going to delete these two and we'll just reuse this little area here.
And let's do a problem like two plus three times five.
OK.
So what do you think the answer is going to be?
I'll give you a second to think about this and then we'll run it and see.
OK.
Do you have your answer?
All right, let's run it and see.
OK, we got 17, if you thought it was going to be 25.
Nice try, but I will explain what happened here.
So in the order of operations, multiplication and division take higher priority over addition and subtraction.
And so in this particular problem, two plus three times five.
The compiler the thing that translates our Java code into machine code scans this equation, and it
sees that we have multiplication and we have that addition.
And so it decides, well, multiplication has to be done before the addition, and it needs two things
to multiply.
So it's going to take the three and the five and multiply those and get 15.
Only after it's done doing that multiplication will it then do some addition.
It will do the addition with the result of the multiplication.
So then it will become two plus 15.
This is equivalent to grouping these up for those of you who have ever had algebra or pre-algebra,
right?
This might help.
This is what's actually happening three times five, 15 plus two.
That's that's how that's going.
And so it wouldn't have mattered if we had had it written this way or.
Five times, three plus two.
You'd still have gotten the same result because multiplication will occur before addition.
Let me also state that most of the math stuff that I'm showing here a good deal of the math, things
that I'm showing in this entire section, not just this one lesson, but in the entire math section
here is fairly universal to most programming languages.
The fact that you've got integers and floats and doubles then and the fact that multiplication and division
will take precedence over addition and subtraction.
These are longstanding standards of most programming languages, if not all in the world.
Programming languages have been following these general rules, probably for at least 50 years, maybe
even longer.
OK, now if we don't want the normal order of operations to take precedent, we can override it by using
parentheses.
So if we don't want the five times three to happen first, we can put parentheses around the parts that
we want to have happen, not necessarily first, but atomically or, you know, together, right?
So we want to make sure that the three plus two happens and then the multiplication.
So now if we do this now we get to 25 that some of you might have expected because we're forcing three
point three plus two to be done before the multiplication times five can be done.
And then, you know, you can you can keep going with this as well.
So we could do divided by just making up anything now.
10.
And if you wanted to, you could even group that all up.
Like so right.
So you can you can make some pretty long problems there that more or less resemble some algebraic equation
or something of that sort.
But keep in mind, currently I'm specifying integers here.
And so if I want more accuracy in my results, I may have to keep that in mind.
Maybe I want to, you know, tell Java explicitly that these are doubles or floats.
By the way, I can put a d behind here.
I didn't tell you this before, because by default, if I just put a decimal point, they'd be doubles
anyway.
But I can also tell Java to make to treat these numbers as as doubles by putting a D behind them just
as I can put an f behind them.
OK.
And so I get a two point five.
There's one more basic operation that I would like you to be aware of, and I think I even showed it
in one of the earliest like introduction videos for the entire course.
And that is called modulo and modulo is represented by the percent sign.
But when used in math, for example, I will do four modulo two like this.
OK, so what modulo does?
You can think of it as doing two things.
First, it performs the regular division in this case four divided by two.
But then it also calculates what is the remainder of that operation?
OK.
So if you think back to like 3rd grade long division you learned about, you know, getting a remainder
and what it does is it actually returns the remainder of this division problem.
So in this case, four is divided by two evenly, so there will be no remainder.
So this operation should return a zero because there is no remainder.
So that's what the modulo does is that it returns the remainder of the division of the two numbers.
OK.
And so if we run this?
Yeah, we get a zero there.
However, if we make this a five.
Right, so now we'll hear we'll run this, and that makes sense, right?
Because two goes into five, two times, which would be four.
But now you have a remainder of one.
In order to get to the five.
OK, so the modulo operation is actually quite useful.
Any time you have a repeating pattern where you want something to keep happening, like alternating
rows of a table, every other row should be white or black.
And what you can do, I'm going to I'm going to show you in a particular way here.
So let's say we ran through the rows of a table in each row was numbered.
OK.
Like so.
If you have a sequence that is in order, but you want an output to alternate in some way, you can
use the modular.
Now let me show you what happens when we run this in this way.
Let's see what the output will be.
Look at that, we get alternating one zero one zero one zero one zero.
OK.
Given a straight sequence of numbers one through ten like this, you're basically saying give me a way
to distinguish every other one with the number two, OK?
Every other one.
Now watch this.
We can change this number here to something else.
OK, so if we change these twos two or three, let's see what happens.
And by the way, one way that I can select most of these twos quickly is by changing the selection mode
of the I.D. from this horizontal kind of style to a vertical style.
I'll show you how to do that so I can do a command shift eight, which I think is, well, I'm sorry,
I don't know how to do that for Windows and PC, but actually hold on.
Let me turn that off for a second.
So for Windows and PC users, I think you can just right click.
Let's see.
You can right click and then select Column Selection mode.
Yes, so you can do it that way.
All right.
So Command Shift eight and now I can put my cursor right here and go down.
Oops, I lost my selection down.
And then to the right, and now I'm selecting all of those tools, and now I can change them all to
threes, all in one go by just hitting three.
And then when I want to get out of column selection mode, I can just toggle this off with another command
shift eight.
And then for Windows and Linux users, you'll have to just right click and then I'll change this last
one down here.
OK, so now what I'm saying is.
Go by threes every third one, I want the pattern to change.
So let's run this and see.
OK, so one two zero one two zero one two zero.
So if I keyed on the zero, for example, so that, you know, every third one, I would highlight something
or do something right.
So basically, you can use the modulo anytime you want to impose a pattern on a sequence of things,
right?
So here's here's our sequence of things the one through 10.
And we want a pattern of every third.
One of these do something or every two, which is the same as saying every other right?
Do something.
OK, so that's where modulo becomes actually quite quite useful.
And you'll see this from time to time in programming most often, probably when you have rows of a table
and you just want to alternate in terms of the coloring of the row or something like that.
All right.
So that's what modulo is for.
All right, now, let's look at a very common thing that we do in programming all the time.
Let me clear this out.
Let's say that we're writing a program where let's let's create a variable and we'll just call it X
and we'll let X equal.
We will initialize X to one.
OK.
And then let's print out X, OK?
And now let's say that after we do something with that, it's like printing out the X.
We want to increment the value of X.
So it started off as one, but we want to increment it by one increment means to basically just add
one to it.
OK.
And then we want to print out X again.
So one way we could do that is by just writing out a statement like X equals x plus one.
OK, now this is starting to look like algebra, and it kind of pretty much is right.
So we're saying X will now equal x plus one.
I know that might look a little weird.
Again, you're really, really new to programming, and maybe it's been a long time since you had algebra
or something.
So what's happening here is we first started setting X equal to one.
So X is one.
Now down here, what's happening is we're saying one is we're saying X will now equal one plus one,
which is two.
And so when this is done, evaluating X will now be set to two instead of one.
OK.
So you can redefine a variable from whatever the variable already was set to.
And then if we.
If we run the print line again, we'll get it too, so let's run this and confirm that behavior.
OK, there we go.
So first we got a one which was line four and then we got a two, which was line six.
Now there are a few ways to do this kind of pattern because it's an incredibly common pattern to do
in programming.
Frequently, we will be going through what are called loops of code, where you kind of just repeat
the same code over and over and over again and you want to keep a track or keep a count or something
like that.
And so you'll do something like this.
However, there are a few other ways to do this.
So this is one way that you could increment a value, right?
Just explicitly saying X equals X plus whatever we could count by twos if we wanted to x equals x plus
two x equals X plus three, et cetera.
OK.
Another way we could do this, though there's a shorthand for this because it's so common.
And that is to say X Plus equals one.
Like so and I know that probably looks pretty, pretty weird, but it's just a shorthand because saying.
X equals X plus whatever in or one or whatever is such a common thing.
So a shorthand was created and by the way, the shorthand doesn't even originate from Java.
It actually, as far as I know, it originates from the language of C, which was invented around 1970,
1969, 1970 somewhere around in there, and it may have existed even with some earlier programming language
for all I know.
OK.
So anyway, we can do it this way as well.
So let's run this.
OK, so we get the same output, right?
And you could change this number, of course, to whatever.
So then it's just going to be the equivalent of saying X equals X plus four.
There you go.
One and then five.
OK.
Now, what's nice about this is that you can keep doing it.
So if you do that multiple times, like in a repeating loop of code, for example, let's see what our
output will be having called this multiple times.
Now we get 21 right because it's going to just keep adding four.
OK, now if you only are wanting to add one to the previous value of the variable, there's another
shorthand, which is even a little shorter than this because adding one is extremely common pattern.
And what you can do here is you can just do this X plus plus that is equivalent to saying X equals X
plus one or.
X Plus equals one.
OK, so X Plus Plus.
So we can run this.
There you go and you still get one and two.
But wait, you can do even a little bit more.
So I'm going to delete that line now you with the Plus Plus operator, you can actually just embed that
right into some code just like this.
Now, what do you think this is going to do?
We set X equal to one and then we print X Plus Plus and then we print X.
Why don't you take a quick guess before I run this?
All right, so now I'm going to run it.
Let's see what this does.
OK, it's still just gives us one two.
Now the reason it gives us one and two is because this plus plus coming after the X like it is here
is really telling Java and the compiler first and foremost, print the current value of X at line four.
And then right after it's done printing the value of X, the value of X will be incremented by one right
after.
OK, so the fact that these pluses are coming?
Oops.
Are coming right after the X is kind of like your your hint.
OK.
And so then when we get to line five and we print X again, by now, this increment has happened and
now X equals x plus one, which in this case is two.
OK.
And so that's what's happening there.
Now you could on another line, do another x plus plus again, and now you would get three here.
By the time you got here, you'd have a three.
In fact, here we'll just run that and prove it.
There you go.
So there's your three.
OK.
If you wanted to do it, to do that for some reason, now there's another shorthand that's related to
this.
What if we wanted the increment to occur online for?
Well, you could do that, too.
And what you would do is.
But the plus plus in front of the ex instead of behind the ex.
So now if we run this look at that now we get two and two was.
Were you all expecting that or are we expecting two and three or were you expecting one and two?
So what's happening here is we started off with X equal to one.
Then we get here and now what happens is the compiler sees this plus plus, and this takes precedent
over executing this statement.
So the first thing it does online for is to Increment X by one, which means that now it's set to two.
Then it prints two.
And that's the only incriminating that is that we're asking it to do so when we print X again.
It was already set to to appear, so we didn't change.
We didn't change it.
It's still two, OK.
And that's why we get to print it twice.
OK.
Now also me put this back to X like so I showed you that we could do X plus equals.
One like this, we can also decrement that means subtract from or go down.
So just as we can do X Plus equals, we can also do X.
We can also do x minus equals.
OK.
So if we run this.
We start with the one and then we get a zero.
OK, so you can you can go up or down, you can increment or decrement and then also we can do x minus
minus.
And we'll run that.
And same thing, one in zero.
And of course, you can do it as a prefix or a postfix.
And then you end up with zero zero.
So that makes sense.
There's another basic math operator I want to show you, in addition to the increments in decrement
things that we were learning before.
Now this is one that applies to billions.
So let's say we have a Boolean, and you may not think of a Boolean as being related to math, but if
you think back to the lowest level of what's actually happening in the computer, where everything is
eventually becoming bits and bytes, whenever we have a Boolean, that is just one bit, I'll show you
again.
Just to refresh your memory here.
So when we instantiate a Boolean, all Java is really doing is just allocating one bit out of some memory
space.
And as I mentioned a few lessons ago, it may it may be allocating an entire byte or even 32 bits or
something like that and then tracking each time we ask for a Boolean.
It may just be assigning that Boolean to some 32 bit value that it stores internally.
For all I know, and I don't really care.
And you don't need to care either, but a Boolean is just one bit.
OK?
Because all it can store is whether something is true or false on or off zero or one.
OK.
All right.
So I'm going to create a Boolean here, and I'm going to call it my flag and I'm going to set it to
true.
And then let's just print that out my flag.
All right, now, I'm not going to run this because you already know it's going to print.
True.
However, similarly to how we were able to increment and decrement a variable, you know, we had like
whatever number one plus plus.
Something like that.
There is a short little thing that we can do to manipulate what is stored in a Boolean as well.
And what we can do is actually put an exclamation mark in front of the variable.
And what that does is it negates or flips the the the value of the Boolean.
So in this case, we had set the Boolean.
We had initialized the Boolean to true.
But when we print this, this little exclamation, which I would read as not, is going to flip the
value of that of what's printed to the opposite.
OK, so here, let's run this now.
And so now it prints false.
OK, so we just negated that so we could do something like my flag equals, not my flag.
And then we could print this, print my flag again.
Oh, now let me remember to get rid of that.
All right.
So in these two system that our print lines were just printing my flag, but in between them, we should
be flipping the bit, so to speak.
So let's run this and see.
Yeah.
So first it printed true.
Then it printed false.
OK, so we're flipping the bit if you've ever heard that expression.
It refers to one bit of a memory location or of a byte or whatever.
All right.
I'm going to wrap this up, but we've have we have plenty more of these little math operations to look
at, so I will see you in the next one.